# GÃ¶ktuÄŸ's [\#FediTips](https://toot.cat/tags/FediTips) No. 002 (Link to [@noelle](https://chat.noelle.codes/@noelle)'s Guide to Mastodon, a little announcement-ish)

I just discovered the great "An Increasingly Less-Brief Guide to
Mastodon" by [@noelle](https://chat.noelle.codes/@noelle) and wanted to
share a link to it here.

<https://github.com/joyeusenoelle/GuideToMastodon/>

I feel like there'll inevitably be some overlap between this thread and
the guide, but I'll probably have some unique stuff to say. (P.S. hey
noelle, feel free to incorporate anything I write under this thread to
your guide\! No need to ask for permission, I give you full permission
here.)

Second, I just wanted to say that I'll be updating this thread weekly,
on weekends, at least for a few weeks as I have some things I wish to
talk about. This will involve some talk on how blocks work and how
effective they are, how to make sure your toots are the most accessible
(including but not limited to media descriptions), picking instances,
and picking desktop/mobile clients.

All sorts of criticism and extra information is welcome under these
toots under this thread. I am sharing what I know, which is by
definition a subset of all that there is to know out there. These thread
is also not restricted to the positive sides of fediverse, so if you
point out some important pitfalls or shortcomings in our culture that I
omit that puts some of us at risk, rest assured I won't be asking you to
brush that under the rug. Fediverse is great and all but there are
downsides and shitty parts and it's not okay IMO to hide that in the
name of good publicity.

Finally, if you have any topic recommendations, feel free to send them
my way. I'll make a note and mention you in it when I eventually post
about it.

(sorry for the delete and redraft, I forgot to include the one link I
was tooting about ðŸ¤¦)

Have a nice day and enjoy fediverse\!
