# Göktuğ's Fedi Tips No. 006 (Picking a good instance you can call home)

This will be a somewhat shorter one compared to the recent ones as I’m
no expert in this topic (I’ve mostly been to two instances myself,
mastodon.sdf.org and toot.cat, which is where I am at at the moment, and
I’ve only used Mastodon and Pixelfed so far as a poster), so this will
be a mostly Mastodon oriented one that’ll need a grain of salt maybe.
But what I say about Mastodon here is most likely applicable to other
servers too.

Anyways, let’s go.

First of all, I’ll note two things to avoid: avoid joinmastodon.org, and
avoid the two largest instances, mastodon.social and mastodon.online.
None of these websites are properly moderated, and they are detrimental
to the community here. Joinmastodon.org indiscriminately includes some
pretty toxic communities in its listings. Sadly, there are some serious
drifts between maintainership of Mastodon (i.e. the people who lead its
development) and the actual community of users.

I think the best way to find a community for someone that starts today
with Fediverse is to look through the Trunk at
<https://communitywiki.org/trunk>. Trunk is a curated list of fedizens
who consent to be included, based on their interests. What you can do
is, find your interests in there, and look through the accounts, and
check out the servers they are on, and pick one that suits you best.

Now, how do you tell if an instance is "good". My definition of good is
an instance that has a good Code of Conduct, that blocks hostile
instances, and that protects its users from hostile actors. If this
deviates from your definition, then sorry, I can’t help you. But
otherwise, let’s look at what I think is the best way to go.

Some instances are very good at blocking the hostile parts of fediverse.
They have long public block lists and some even list why each server was
blocked. Two most useful resources IMHO are rage.love and toot.cat.
Rage.love has a very extensive blocklist and very active moderations,
but doesn’t list why instances are blocked. Toot.cat has a shorter
blocklist which is still pretty extensive, and the mods are pretty
responsive, and they do list why most instances are blocked.

What you can do is, use the blocklists of these two instances as a
guide: you find an instance you are interested in. First, check with the
blocklists of these two instances, and if they are blocked by either,
you can safely skip that instance you was considering. Keep in mind that
while rage.love is more quicker to block and don’t list individual
reasons, they don’t just go blocking instances willy nilly as a
recreative Sunday activity, so do not think like just because an
instance is not in toot.cat’s blocklist, it’s not that bad. Think this
way: if anybody from toot.cat encountered such an instance and reported
it, 99.9% of the time it’d get blocked here as well. It’s just that
rage.love is a bit more proactive in their blocking.

Now your candidate is in neither of the lists, what do you do? Look
through a few things: their about page, their public timeline, and their
user directory. All of these are accessible from their front page unless
they’ve disabled access to any (in which case you might want to avoid
them for the time being as a new user because you do need the
information there, but keep in mind that this doesn’t mean the instance
is bad per se). Then, \*skip\* the instance if:

- there is \*no\* Code of Conduct that expressly forbids sexism,
racism, fascism, pedophilia, harassment, etc.

- "be excellent / kind to each other" is not a code of conduct, make
sure the CoC is clear and explicit

- says something like "this is a free speech instance", "we don’t block
/ defederate from anybody", "we federate with everyone", etc

- there is no guidance on how to post NSFW content (open / marked NSFW
/ with CW and marked NSFW / not allowed)

- people are tooting a lot of low effort content

- it feels like the rules in the Code of Conduct aren’t enforced

- it looks like the instance federates with (i.e. does not block or
silence) hostile instances that you know of

- hosts accounts that look like they are fascist, racist, sexist,
anti-LGBT+, etc

- has more than a few thousand accounts registered

- is a Pleroma instance

Keep in mind that if an instance fails to tick even a subset of boxes,
it’s inevitable that nicer users will slowly wither away and you’ll end
up remaining with bad actors, and you’ll be looking for a new instance
eventually (viz. <https://eev.ee/blog/2016/07/22/on-a-technicality/> and
<http://pervocracy.blogspot.com/2012/06/missing-stair.html>).

On that last note, on why Pleroma, another fediverse server like
Mastodon, is to be avoided, it’s two-fold. First of all, Pleroma does
not respect and does circumvent instance and user blocks. This is part
to be blamed on Mastodon too, but they actively do allow that stuff.
Part a consequence of the aforementioned, Pleroma has come to be
associated with some of the worse parts of fediverse. Now this does not
mean everyone who uses Pleroma is as such, because some people prefer
pleroma for their single-user instances as it's easier to maintain and
less resource intensive, but I’d be safer than sorry. Single user or
friends/family only instances are not open to registrations anyways, so
they are off topic in this toot already.

Good news is there are some new server software that’s being coded up by
people who put community first and numbers second, that doesn’t have the
shortcomings of either of Mastodon (e.g. see my fedi tip 003
<https://toot.cat/@cadadr/106598385488614687>) or Pleroma. One example
that I keep my eyes on is GoToSocial
<https://github.com/superseriousbusiness/gotosocial>.

Anyways, you looked around hard, you found an instance that ticks all
your boxes (you pick your boxes, all I do is make suggestions), and you
decided to sign up. What now?

There are four things that may happen:

One, the easiest: the instance is not accepting registrations anymore.
This may be for any reasons, and either permanent or temporary, but the
instance is not open to new people. Nothing you can do but skip.

Two, the instance is invite only. You will need to be invited to be able
to sign up at this instance. If you personally know a user good enough
from online spaces and/or meatspace, you can ask them for an invite.

Three, the instance only accepts signup attempts after moderator review.
You will be asked to provide some information along with the sign up
form, like e.g. "why do you want to join our instance?" Just be honest
and introduce yourself, and give them the info they ask. Don’t take it
personal if they don’t accept, they don’t know you, and they probably
want a small, tight knit community.

Four, the instance is open to registrations. Fill in the form and
submit, now you are a member. Enjoy your time, abide by the CoC, don’t
punch down, be nice and kind to people, and make fediverse a nicer place
than you found with your existence\!

[\#FediTips](https://toot.cat/tags/FediTips)
[\#Mastodon](https://toot.cat/tags/Mastodon)
[\#Guide](https://toot.cat/tags/Guide)

P.S.: If you disagree with my "controversial" points here, please note
that I know what arguments you will be making and I have my mind made up
about it, so let’s not derail this thread with useless controversy. Just
subtoot me. (What’s a subtoot? We’ll talk about it later down the road,
but simply put it’s the mastodon equivalent of "subtweet"
<https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=subtweet>.) Let’s not
engage in unproductive tugs of war.

P.S. 2: hehe did I say shorter, I meant longer :blobcatfacepalm:​
