# Göktuğ's Fedi Tips No. 007 (Finding people to follow)

"People are strange, if you’re a stranger, faces look ugly when you're
alone."

So you made your account on some server instance, and...

Nothing happens. Your home feed is full of dark matter, your
notifications is contain nothing to be notified of, and this two is all
you see when you log in to Mastodon likely. Or maybe the instance made
you automatically follow an admin / announcement account, so all you see
is, admin announcements. Boring.

Today, we’ll solve that problem.

First of all, I want to start out with explaining the nature of
relationships here. Different people come for different things,
obviously, but overall, most fediverse servers are designed to foster a
social media environment, rather than a forum. This means it’s more
similar to Twitter, Instagram, a personal blog, Tumblr, Ameblo, etc.,
than it is to bulletin boards, Reddit, Hacker News, etc. What this means
is that, the personal sides of relationships, and your ‘circles’ have
some more emphasis than which particular community you happen to find
yourself into. The intensity of this aspect varies depending on people
you follow and the server you are on, among others, and ultimately on
you, but you’ll find that who you interact with is inevitably a big
determinant of your experience.

Relatedly, then, it’s important to remember that you are interacting
with persons, which entails you take care to respect some basic,
universal boundaries, and boundaries people ask you to respect. Doing
this is super easy, barely an inconvenience: all it takes is a click and
a little reading. People usually write how they expect people to
interact with them in their profiles, or pinned posts. So, prior to
interacting with someone for the first time, it’s good habit to jump to
their profile with a click, and read their bio, and any pinned posts
they may have. For example, if you go to my profile
[@cadadr](https://toot.cat/@cadadr), you’ll see that it briefly
introduces me, lists my name and pronouns, my links, and if you look at
my pinned toots, you will see one that’s about boosts and follow
requests, and another one that is tagged as
[\#introduction](https://toot.cat/tags/introduction). The first sets
some boundaries, and the second is a longer bio that explains who I am.
It’s especially important that you give these bios and pinned posts a
read before sending follow requests, which is what we’ll be doing.
Please don’t forget that you’re entering a personal space when sending a
follow request (which I’ll abbreviate as FR from now on), you’re
entering someone’s personal space, so some respect goes a long way.

Also, what is a follow request? Well, some people "lock" their accounts,
meaning you can’t just follow them via clicking the "Follow" button;
instead, when you click that button, they’ll get a notification saying
that you want to follow them, and they’ll have the option to either
accept the request, in which case you become a follower, and if they
reject, that means you can’t follow them. If an account is locked,
they’ll probably have listed whether they expect FRs or not in their
profile, so read before you send one. How do you tell if an account is
locked? Most servers will indicate this somehow, e.g. on Mastodon it’s a
padlock icon besides their fediverse handle.

So, how do we start following people and getting followers, then, now
that we learned how to be respectful? Well, a great place to start from
is filling up your bio and writing an
[\#introduction](https://toot.cat/tags/introduction) post for yourself.
The FediTip 001 has all the information you’ll need to make your profile
beautiful and welcoming for fedizens looking to follow you or accept a
follow request from you: <https://toot.cat/@cadadr/106561339959530103>

After this, patience is key. We’ll talk about how to accelerate some
things and make your home timeline more interesting and engaging without
spending too much time and getting bored, but first and foremost, it’s
important to notice that one way or another, you’re establishing social
circles, and it doesn’t happen at the snap of a finger. It takes time to
build a healthy environment for yourself, so be patient.

Let’s find people then. The best place to look at first is your "local
timeline", which is a listing of recent posts by people on your server.
They’ll likely be like-minded people, especially if the server is not a
generalist one, so follow that local timeline, and contact or follow
people you find interesting, not forgetting the above advice. Likely
some will follow back.

Also, start posting early on, too. People will see your posts on the
local timeline, and on the federated timeline, which we’ll talk about
next, and they can follow you or send FRs to you, which happens a lot.

Another place where you can look to find people is, as I mentioned, the
federated timeline. This is where you see posts from people on all the
servers your instance communicates to. Depending on the moderation
policies of your instance, this area can be way too noisy or overrun by
bad content, but still, there’s value in looking there every now and
then, early on, when your home timeline isn’t satisfying yet. Chances
are you’ll eventually stop visiting it tho, once your home timeline
(let’s abbreviate this as TL from now on) is rich enough.

Here I want to note that Fediverse is different than twitter in one
important respect: it’s pretty common that most or even all of your
mutuals are people who you met here, and don’t know offline. Don’t feel
discouraged if you don’t know any fedizens outside the fediverse, it’s a
pretty common experience, the majority, even.

It is pretty likely that these advice will bring you follows and
followers, but how about finding like-minded people a bit quicker? Is
there a way to get an initial boost of people with similar interests as
you to help make this process nicer? Well, friend, the Trunk and gup.pe
have you covered there\!

The Trunk, at <https://communitywiki.org/trunk> and
[@trunk](https://botsin.space/@trunk), is a listing of Fediverse
accounts based on topics of interest. These people have added themselves
there, so they expect you to follow them based on shared interests. You
can add yourself as well, following the instructions on the wiki.

Gup.pe, <https://gup.pe/>, is kind of a Usenet-over-Fediverse thing. On
gup.pe you have themed groups, represented as accounts. If you follow an
account, and if someone makes a post mentioning this account, you’ll get
notified. For example, let’s try creating and posting to a group:
[@GoktugsFediTips](https://gup.pe/u/goktugsfeditips). Sadly I don’t
really use gup.pe and don’t know many groups, but some I’ve encountered
or have been told about are: ttrpg, plants, mastobikes. follow them @
\<group-name\> @ gup.pe (removing spaces of course).

Another way of finding people is using hastags. Hastags are like hastags
on any other platform, but on fediverse they are also the only means to
search for posts¹, so they are important and useful. You want to search
for hashtags about your favourite topics, and tag some of your posts
with relevant hashtags for this purpose. Some apps will let you follow
hashtags, and you can find people from there. Be kind, be considerate
and send your follow if the person seems receptive to it. So, let’s
hashtag this very post to make it more discoverable:

[\#FediTips](https://toot.cat/tags/FediTips)
[\#FindingPeople](https://toot.cat/tags/FindingPeople)

Lastly, I want to talk about boosts and threads. Once you start
following people, you’ll see their boosts, and you’ll see them interact
with other fedizens. This can be a source for finding people to follow
as well, and, for myself, this has been the most fruitful way of adding
people to my circles. This will also lead to a complex network where the
circles of people you follow overlap, and it makes for a nice
experience. Again, respect people’s boundaries, keep in mind that you
are establishing a personal contact and not making a reddit comment or
following a blogs RSS feed, and click that follow button if the person
seems receptive to it and to you.

So yeah, this is where it ends this week. Hope it was useful to you.
Next week, if the plans don’t change, we’ll be talking about fediverse
clients, i.e. apps that you can use to access your account outside of
your servers web interface.

Have a nice week\!

⁂

¹ Full text search of all posts is not provided because sadly it’s
frequently abused by bad actors trying to harass other users.
